You may have heard that deep learning requires a very large number of samples in order to train the
models, so we need to have a lot of data to fit these models.
And why is that the case?
Why do we need so many examples, so much data to fit these deep learning models?
Well, the answer comes from random sampling and sampling variability.
And you are going to learn in this video what this concept means.
So to start with, let's think about a scientific question.
How tall is the average Montenegrin?
A Montenegrin is a person who lives in the country Montenegro.
Now for this purpose, for you know, for this video, we don't actually care about the answer.
It doesn't matter how tall they actually are.
Although I will give you the answer in a few slides.
The question is, how do we know the answer?
How do we find out the average height of a Montenegrin?
By the way, here is the country of Montenegro.
I've never been there, but from pictures on Google it seems to be a beautiful, beautiful country.
Anyway, uh, so how tall is the average Montenegrin?
Well, the way we can find this out is by going to Montenegro.
And after a couple weeks of holiday and hiking and, you know, relaxing on the beach, then we get
down to science, we go around, we just, you know, we find a big crowd of Montenegrins, and we just
pick one person at random, like this guy, and then we take his height.
We, you know, we bring a ruler with us, and we measure that guy and we find out that he has 160cm
tall.
Okay.
But that is just one person.
We pick another random person and that person is taller.
That person is 192cm tall.
It's pretty tall.
But then, you know, we look up on Google, and the internet says that the average Montenegrin is or
the average height of Montenegrins is Two centimeters tall.
Now, if this is the average, why is it that we get one person who's shorter than the average and one
person who's taller than the average?
Well, the obvious answer is sampling variability.
Not everyone has the same height.
Just because there is an average height around this value.
So sampling variability refers to the phenomenon that different randomly selected samples from the same
population can have different values of the same measurement.
So we are measuring height with the same ruler in every person.
It's the same.
So the same measurement the same ruler.
But we take different samples and we are going to get different values.
So this means that a single measurement is likely to be an unreliable estimate of a population parameter.
Now how reliable or unreliable a single measurement is depends on a variety of factors.
Mainly, it depends on the variability of the distribution.
But this is important for deep learning because, you know, let's say we're building a model that can
recognize cats, that can detect when a cat is in a picture.
Well, if every single cat in the universe looked exactly the same, you know, in the way that every
electron in the universe is exactly the same.
If every single cat looked exactly the same, and every picture were taken from the same angle, we
wouldn't actually need, you know, thousands of examples of pictures of cats.
We would only need one picture of a cat.
But obviously that's not the case.
There are different kinds of cats.
Cats look very different from each other.
We have some weird examples of cats here and corona safe cats.
So we need to collect a large sample of images of cats because of sampling variability.
So where does sampling variability even come from?
Why do we have variability in our samples?
Well part of the answer is that there's natural variation.
This is often seen in biology and in physics, so there's just natural variation all over the place.
Part of it is measurement noise.
Our sensors are imperfect.
For example, you know, in the example I gave with the height of Montenegrins, we're just using a
regular ruler.
So we can say that it's accurate up to about a centimeter or maybe half a centimeter.
But if we wanted to measure more precisely, let's say up to a nanometer, then, you know, our sensors
are just not good enough.
Our rulers are not good enough to get that level of precision.
So that alone introduces a little bit of noise and sampling variability.
Also, complex systems have variables that depend on or interact with other variables.
So for example, if we were to measure height of lots of randomly selected people while ignoring age,
the sampling variability would increase a lot, right?
Because we are mixing together the height of babies with the height of adults.
And you know, the universe is just a random and wildly unpredictable place.
So there's just some natural stochasticity, I guess that's related to this first point I made here.
Okay, so what do we do about sampling variability?
Well, you know, the obvious solution is to take lots and lots of samples so that we can compute an
average.
And the idea is that the more variability there is, the more samples that we need to approximate the
true population mean.
This is related to a concept in statistics called the law of large numbers.
Essentially this means that the larger samples we take, the more samples we take, the more data we
collect, the better we are going to be able to estimate the true underlying statistics that we really
care about.
You will see examples of this also in deep learning throughout the rest of this course, that when we
are working with relatively simple stimuli, relatively simple data values, we actually don't need
that many samples.
In fact, you'll see Sometimes we were.
We will be simulating our own data, we'll be generating our own data.
And we get really, really good deep learning model performance based on only 100 samples.
But if you would try to train a much more complex, really deep convolutional neural network with 100
pictures, you're not going to get anywhere.
Okay, so have lots and lots of data.
That's one thing that we need to overcome the issue of sampling variability.
So again why we need to worry about sampling variability in deep learning.
Well deep learning models learn by examples.
So we need to have lots of examples for our deep learning models to actually learn effectively.
This is also an important issue because non-random or biased sampling can introduce systematic biases
into the deep learning models, and prevent them from learning the way that we want them to learn.
This is a topic I will discuss in more detail later in the course.
We need to have random sampling in order for the models to be good.
If we don't have random samples, we have non-representative or biased sampling that can cause overfitting
and it limits the generalizability.
Again, this is a big term.
This is you know, there's a lot to unpack in this sentence here I'm going to talk more about this.
We're going to have several videos just on this topic later in the course.
Now I'd like to switch to Python and give you a demonstration of sampling variability.
So what we are going to do here is generate a population of numbers.
So this is the entire population.
This is like all of the people in Montenegro.
And these are their heights okay.
And then because we have the entire population we can actually compute the population mean.
And that's what I do here.
And then what I do is use numpy dot random choice.
And I'm going to select from this population.
I'm going to select a random sample.
So a random choice random sample of five individuals.
So we just randomly pick five of these numbers at random.
And then we compute the average of that sample.
And now you see that those two are not the same.
The numbers are not the same.
So the mean of the population is 1.625.
But the mean of this particular random sample is 1.0.
Now I'm going to run this code again.
And this number is going to be the same of course because all these numbers are printed out here.
But this number will differ because this is a new random sample.
So that was actually a nice demonstration because the first sample was too low and the second sample
is now too high.
So we can keep running this again.
Wow, that one is really high.
That's even much larger.
So you can see that sometimes the.
Wow.
Okay.
Now this is really large 4.6.
That is Like three times larger than the population.
So sometimes if we take small random samples, we get very non-representative values.
This is why we want to take larger and larger samples.
And that's what I want to illustrate to you here.
So we're going to do here is run through 10,000 experiments.
We're going to take 10,000 random samples that you see I'm just running this line again.
This is exactly the same line as above.
But now I have it inside this for loop.
So we're going to run.
We're going to generate 10,000 random samples and compute the mean and store the mean.
And then I'm going to make a histogram of all of those samples okay.
And then you see here this magenta vertical line is the the true.
Oops sorry the true mean the population mean here.
So you see that as we increase our number of experiments, the average of those averages is getting
closer and closer to the true mean.
That's basically what the law of large numbers is telling us.
Now, it's pretty interesting to play around with these experiments.
You can try.
For example, increasing the size from five to maybe 15.
So let's see.
So here we had the variability go from looks like minus four up to plus six approximately.
And now we get a distribution that goes minus two up to two.
So the distribution itself has gotten much narrower here.
So this is a motivation for taking larger samples getting more data from the population.
So in this video you learned about sampling variability what it means where it comes from.
And I also mentioned the importance of random or unbiased sampling.
And the problem I mentioned the problems that nonrandom sampling can lead to in particular overfitting
and lack of generalization.
These are concepts that we will go into much more detail about later on in the course.